Editorial review (#80)
iov-one/docs: docs/weave/basics/02-consensus.md

---
id: consensus 
title: Consensus 
sidebar_label: Consensus 
---

Consensus is the algorithm by which a set of computers come to agreement on which possible state is correct, and thus guarantee one consistent, global view of the state of the system.

## Eventual finality

> All PoW systems use eventual finality, where the resource cost of creating a block is extremely high. After many blocks are gossiped, the longest chain of blocks has the most work invested in it, and thus is the true chain. The "true" head of the chain can switch, in a process called "chain reorganization". But the probability of such a reorganization decreases exponentially the more blocks are built on top of it. Thus, in Bitcoin, the "6 block rule" means that if there are 6 blocks build on top of the block with your transaction, you can be extremely confident that no chain reorganization will ever generate a new true chain that does not include that block. Note this is not a guarantee that it cannot happen, just that the cost of doing so becomes so prohibitively high that is very unlikely to ever happen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All PoW systems use eventual finality, where the resource cost of creating a block is extremely high. After many blocks are gossiped, the longest chain of blocks has the most work invested in it, and thus is the true chain. The "true" head of the chain can switch, in a process called "chain reorganization." But the probability of such a reorganization decreases exponentially the more blocks are built on top of it. Thus, in Bitcoin, the "6-block rule" means that if there are six blocks build on top of the block with your transaction, you can be extremely confident that no chain reorganization will ever generate a new true chain that does not include that block. Note this is not a guarantee that it cannot happen, just that the cost of doing so becomes so prohibitively high that is very unlikely to ever happen.
```

> Many early PoS systems, such as BitShares, used voting instead of work to mine blocks, but still used the "longest chain wins" consensus algorithm. However, this has the critical [nothing at stake](https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Problems#8-proof-of-stake) problem, since the cost of "mining" blocks on 2, 3, or even 100 alternate chains is quite low.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many early PoS systems, such as BitShares, used voting instead of work to mine blocks, but still used the "longest chain wins" consensus algorithm. However, this has the critical [nothing at stake](https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Problems#8-proof-of-stake) problem, since the cost of "mining" blocks on two, three, or even 100 alternative chains is quite low.
```

Another issue here is that any state may have to be reverted, and the data store must maintain an "undo history" to undo several blocks and apply others. And clients must wait several blocks (minutes to hours) before they can take off-chain actions based on the transaction (eg. give you goods for a blockchain payment).

## Immediate finality

> An alternative approach used to guarantee constency comes out of academic research into Byzantine Fault Tolerance from the 80s and 90s, which "culminated" in [PBFT](http://pmg.csail.mit.edu/papers/osdi99.pdf) . [Tendermint](https://tendermint.com/) uses an algorithm very similar to PBFT with optimizations learned from blockchain developments to create an extremely secure consensus algorithm. All nodes vote in multiple rounds, and only produce blocks when they are guaranteed that the block is the "correct" globally consensus. Even in the case of omnipotent network manipulation, this algorithm will never produce to blocks at the same height (a fork) if less than one third of the nodes are actively collaborating to break the system. This is possibly the strongest guarantee of any production blockchain consensus algorithm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An alternative approach used to guarantee consistency comes out of academic research into Byzantine Fault Tolerance from the 80s and 90s, which "culminated" in [PBFT](http://pmg.csail.mit.edu/papers/osdi99.pdf). [Tendermint](https://tendermint.com/) uses an algorithm very similar to PBFT with optimizations learned from blockchain developments to create an extremely secure consensus algorithm. All nodes vote in multiple rounds, and only produce blocks when they are guaranteed that the block is the "correct" global consensus. Even in the case of omnipotent network manipulation, this algorithm will never produce two blocks at the same height (a fork) if less than one third of the nodes are actively collaborating to break the system. This is possibly the strongest guarantee of any production blockchain consensus algorithm.
```

> The benefit of this approach is that any block that has over two thirds of the signature is [provably correct by light clients](https://blog.cosmos.network/light-clients-in-tendermint-consensus-1237cfbda104) The state is never rolled back and clients can take actions based on that state. This opens the possibility of blockchain payments to be settled in the order of a second or two, similar latency with using a credit card in a store. It also allows reasonably responsive applications to be built on a blockchain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The benefit of this approach is that any block that has over two-thirds of the signature is [provably correct by light clients](https://blog.cosmos.network/light-clients-in-tendermint-consensus-1237cfbda104). The state is never rolled back and clients can take actions based on that state. This opens the possibility of blockchain payments to be settled in the order of a second or two, similar latency with using a credit card in a store. It also allows reasonably responsive applications to be built on a blockchain.
```
